---
layout: single
title: 'rncl: A new package to import NEXUS and Newick trees in R'
date: 2014-12-03 13:46:55.000000000 -05:00
type: post
published: true
status: publish
categories:
- Hacking
tags:
- phylobase
- phylogenetics
- R
- rncl
meta:
  _wpcom_is_markdown: '1'
  _edit_last: '9'
  _wpas_done_all: '1'
  _wpas_skip_6113480: '1'
author:
  login: francois
  email: francois.michonneau@gmail.com
  display_name: François
  first_name: François
  last_name: Michonneau
---

<a href="http://cran.r-project.org/package=rncl" title="rncl on
CRAN">`rncl`'</a> is now officially on CRAN. This package provides an
interface with
the <a href="http://phylo.bio.ku.edu/ncldocs/v2.1/funcdocs/index.html"
title="the nexus class library website">NEXUS Class Library</a> (NCL). NCL,
written in C++, is included in several popular phylogenetic packages including
Garli. NCL is comprehensive and is intended to parse and write valid NEXUS
files, and has been extended to also support Newick files. <code>rncl</code>
provides an interface to this library to import phylogenetic files in R.


<h1>What are NEXUS files? What are Newick files?</h1>

NEXUS files are commonly used files in phylogenetic and can be used to
represent data used to build phylogenetic trees (e.g., DNA sequence alignment),
phylogenetic trees, and/or data associated with species in the tree. Each
element of a NEXUS file is found in a &ldquo;block&rdquo;.


The trees in NEXUS files are represented using
the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newick_format" title="wikipedia
article about the Newick format">Newick notation</a>
(e.g., <code>((A,B),C);</code>), but typically the list of taxa are defined
first in a TAXA block, and represented later in the tree with a corresponding
number.

NEXUS is an extension of the Newick file format. The Newick file format could
represent either sequence data or trees. It was first designed in the
mid-1980&#39;s and was most famously implemented in Felsenstein&#39;s PHYLIP
program. NEXUS extended Newick by allowing the inclusion in a single file of
both sequence and trees, and providing more flexibility by allowing programs to
add additional blocks. If you are interested more in the topic, I suggest you
read the <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/46.4.590">original paper</a>
by Maddison, Swofford, Maddison describing the NEXUS file format.

<h1>Why rncl?</h1>

Because NEXUS files can contain a lot information, that can be presented in
different ways, writing a robust parser is very difficult. The NEXUS Class Library
has been developed since the early 2000&#39;s, first by <a
href="http://phylogeny.uconn.edu/">Paul O. Lewis</a> and more recently by <a
href="http://phylo.bio.ku.edu/content/mark-t-holder">Mark Holder</a>. Because it
is mature and used by several popular programs, its implementation is
comprehensive and robust.

Importing NEXUS and Newick files in R works in many cases, but is not
  ideal. Additionally, NCL can parse trees, and is able to deal with situations
  that the phylogenetic packages in R cannot deal with.

Last September, I participated in the <a
  href="http://ropensci.org/blog/2014/08/15/open-tree-of-life-hackathon/">hackathon</a>
  for the Open Tree of Life. There, with <a
  href="http://cartwrig.ht/people/#david-j-winter">David Winter</a> and <a
  href="http://www-personal.umich.edu/%7Ejosephwb/">Joseph Brown</a>, we started
  to develop a package that interfaces with the Open Tree of Life API (<a
  href="https://github.com/fmichonneau/rotl">rotl</a>). It allows users to work
  with the data from the Open Tree of Life directly in R. However, we couldn't
  use the functions provided by ape to import the trees, as many trees contained
  singletons (a node doesn't lead to two descendants) represented as in this
  example:

`'(((((A)cats,B)dogs,(C,D)mammals)tetrapods)animals,E)life;`

Currently, it's difficult to read such trees in R. When using <a href="http://cran.r-project.org/package=ape">ape</a>:

```r
library(ape)
singTree <- "(((((A)cats,B)dogs,(C,D)mammals)tetrapods)animals,E)life;"
ape::read.tree(text=singTree)
```

```
## Error in if (sum(obj[[i]]$edge[, 1] == ROOT) == 1  dim(obj[[i]]$edge)[1]
   missing value where TRUE/FALSE needed
```

<a href="http://cran.r-project.org/package=phytools">`phytools`</a>
  has a function that allows it but is slow on large trees as it has to parse
  characters one by one:

```r
library(phytools)
phytools::read.newick(text=singTree)
```

```
## Phylogenetic tree with 5 tips and 6 internal nodes.
##
## Tip labels:
## [1] "A" "B" "C" "D" "E"
## Node labels:
## [1] "life"      "animals"   "tetrapods" "dogs"      "cats"      "mammals"
##
## Rooted; no branch lengths.
```

<code>rncl</code> can read files with singleton without issues.


```r
library(rncl)
tmpFile <- tempfile()
cat(singTree, file=tmpFile)
rncl::read_newick_phylo(file=tmpFile)
```

```
## Phylogenetic tree with 5 tips and 4 internal nodes.
##
## Tip labels:
## [1] "A" "B" "C" "D" "E"
## Node labels:
## [1] "life"      "tetrapods" "dogs"      "mammals"
##
## Rooted; no branch lengths.
```

You may notice that the tree returned doesn't include the node labels associated
with the singleton nodes whereas phytools does. This is because the exported
function for rncl collapses the singletons before returning the object while
phytools does not.

<code>rncl</code> is also efficient on large trees. For instance here is how
the three functions perform on a 3000+ tip tree:

```r
library(microbenchmark)
microbenchmark(tr_ape(), tr_phytools(), tr_rncl(), times=10)
```

```
<pre><code>## Unit: milliseconds
##           expr        min         lq      mean    median        uq
##       tr_ape()  543.02340  551.91244  583.0824  572.0407  588.4832
##  tr_phytools() 3947.90586 4029.03325 4337.5111 4168.4067 4643.2461
##      tr_rncl()   84.62412   93.07477  103.2693  100.4018  114.4568
##        max neval
##   706.5012    10
##  5069.9927    10
##   124.0237    10
```

rncl is about 7 times faster than ape and 50 times faster than phytools.

<h1>rncl and phylobase</h1>

Most of the current code in rncl actually comes from the <a
href="https://github.com/fmichonneau/phylobase">phylobase</a> package. Given the
need to have an efficient parser for the package that will interface with the
Open Tree of Life&#39;s API, it made sense to take NCL out of phylobase and have
it in a package of its own. The main difference is that rncl can build the edge
matrix directly from NCL outputs, and does not rely on ape&#39;s parser for
newick strings, making it faster and allowing for the singleton nodes.

Not having ncl inside phylobase will also make the development of phylobase
  easier as it will include a lot less code to be compiled. However, phylobase
  will remain very efficient at parsing NEXUS files that contain data associated
  with tips of trees but will depend on rncl to do so. These changes will be
  part of the next version of phylobase (0.8.0) that I am planning to release in
  January.

<h1>What&#39;s next?</h1>

Currently rncl only parses trees and data associated with tips in the
trees. It should be relatively easy to extend it to also parse sequence
data. rncl could also be used to generate NEXUS and Newick files directly from
phylogenetic objects in R.

In the mean time, please report bugs and request features on github where
the <a href="https://github.com/fmichonneau/rncl">development of rncl</a> takes
place.
